11 and we've been in the psalm for this our fifth week looking at Psalm 11 and
be looking at verses 3 and 4 this evening and of course as you recall
with me as we've studied through this psalm here on Wednesday evenings that
David has declared that he put his trust in the Lord. We find and we spent two
weeks on that first statement of verse number 1 of chapter 11 because it's so
vital it's so important that we understand that we put our trust in the
Lord. He is the creator and the sustainer he is the most high God the possessor of
heaven and earth that's what we find that Abram finds out when the king of
Salem meets him along the way and what a blessing to understand that our God is
in control of all things and he encourages us he instructs us to trust
him and we find that David says and the Lord put I might trust and then he goes
on through the psalm and begins to describe for us the things that he'd
been facing. We found first of all that he was facing voices and counsel from
others according to the end of verse number 1 that would say to him flee as a
bird to your mountain in other words based on the circumstances with all
that's going on just get away just just leave just flee and the reality is that
there are some that though we would declare that we've put our trust in the
Lord they may discourage us from trusting God and they may tell us to do
as these were saying to David to flee as a bird to your mountain and no doubt
there are times that even in your life and in my life that we probably face
circumstances and situations where we've had that idea I wish I could just
get out of this I wish I could just get away and yet God said his grace is
sufficient as we would parallel those truths between our study of 2nd
Corinthians and here in Psalm 11. Last week we looked at verse number 2 as we
dealt with the fact that there was a plan of the wicked and we find that that
plan was uncovered and God revealed to us a principle that's important for us
to understand and we saw that principle illustrated in the life of David as he
was fleeing from Saul. The Bible says in verse number 2 for lo the wicked bend
their bow they make ready their arrow upon the string they may privily shoot
at the upright in heart and David was facing continued attack. We may note of
the fact that as we looked at that plan and looked at the principle that the
wicked attack but the Lord defends and as we went through several different
chapters in the book of 1st Samuel and seeing in the life of David that as Saul
was attacking the Lord was defending and how God is his defense and he is our
defense and for that we ought to rejoice. We find that as we move forward into the
psalm further details are revealed to us with regard to really the the situation
that David found himself in but led to a question at the end of verse number
3 and that question will serve as the title for our study this evening. Notice
verse 3 and 4 together with me. The Bible says this in verse 3 if the
foundations be destroyed and then notice this question what can the righteous do?
Verse number 4 the Lord is in his holy temple the Lord's throne is in heaven
his eyes behold his eyelids try the children of men. As we look at verse 3
and 4 and we look at this question at the end of verse number 3 we use the
title this evening what can the righteous do? If you're taking notes I
want you to first note with me the circumstances. The circumstances
according to verse number 3 we've already mentioned in verse 2 the
continued threat of the wicked and the attack and so on and so forth but we
find that in verse number 3 David says if the foundations be destroyed what
can the wicked do? Begin to think about that thought of the foundations being
destroyed and understanding David living in the time in the era in which he's
living and he's living during the time of Saul being the king and Saul was a
king that in the beginning of his reign he was little in his own sight but he
got very prideful of course after the situation that takes place with the
women singing the praise of David he had great just disdain for David and desired
to kill David made David his enemy continually but through that taking
place we find that there were really a ripple effect within the kingdom. In fact
as you begin to think about Saul and his reign and all that was taking place and
you think about him singularly purposed of destroying David the responsibilities
that he was not fulfilling as the king and the way in which the foundations of
the society that David had come to know were even eroding and we're gonna think
about the the situation the circumstances if you will and I want to
just draw your attention to one thing turn over 1st Samuel chapter 22 and for
sake of time we'll just look at this one illustration this evening of something
that's just absolutely mind-boggling that takes place during this time in
which David is fleeing from Saul because Saul has made David his enemy
continually we find that in 1st Samuel chapter 22 David is going and he goes
and he finds himself in a situation where he is seeking to have safety and
protection because of again Saul following and pursuing him the Bible
tells us in verse number three of 1st Samuel 22 that David went thence to
Mispah of Moab and he said unto the king of Moab let my father and my mother I
pray thee come forth and be with you till I know what God will do for me and
so we find that he goes and he has an opportunity according to verse number
five the prophet Gad said unto David abide not in the hold depart and get thee
into the land of Judah then David departed and came to the forest of
Herod and so David is following the leadership of the Lord and David is
doing what God is giving him as far as direction is concerned the Bible says in
verse 6 when Saul heard that David was discovered and that the men that were
with him now saw a boat in Gibeah under tree and Rama having a spear in his hand
and all the servants were standing about him then Saul said unto his servants
that stood about him here now you Benjamites will the son of Jesse give
every one of you fields and vineyards and make you all captains of thousands
and captains of hundreds that all of you have conspired against me and so Saul is
really trying to paint this picture of all the people being against him and
what happens in this passage is then Doeg according to verse number nine
which is the Edomite he's one of the servants of Saul he tells Saul about the
situation that had taken place back in chapter 21 now in 1st Samuel chapter 21
we find that David is is on the run and he goes to knob to a him elect the
priest and we find that he received sustenance he also receives the sword
remember he gets the sword that belonged to Goliath he said there's
none like that we find that he flees but Doeg was there and he saw the encounter
and we find that as Saul is trying to to play on the emotions of the people and
like woe is me and you're conspiring against me he was the one that was in
the wrong Saul we find that he is sharing these things and Doeg is there
and Doeg begins to explain to Saul what had happened notice in verse number 11
then the king sent to call a him elect the priest the son of a high tub and all
the father's house the priests that were knob and they came all of them to the
king and Saul said here now thou son of a high tub and he answered here I am my
Lord and Saul said unto him why have you conspired against me thou and the son of
Jesse he can't even mention David's name he hates him so much it's terrible
and that now has given him bread and a sword and has inquired of God for him
that he should rise against me to lie in wait as it as at this day then notice
what a him elect says in verse 14 and a him elect answered the king and said and
who is so faithful among all thy servants as David David had a good
testimony a him elect understood the testimony that David had and the Bible
says which is the king's son-in-law and goeth at thy bidding and is honorable in
thine house did I then begin to inquire of God for him be it far from me let not
the king impute anything into a servant nor to all the house of my father for
thy servant notice the universe number 15 knew nothing of all this less or more
the king said in verse 16 thou shalt surely die a him elect thou and all thy
father's house the king said unto the footman that stood about him turn and
slay the priest of the Lord can you imagine this I mean Saul turns to his
men and he says kill all these priests what was their offense what did they do
they were guilty of nothing this is how low Saul was was fallen this is the
environment if you want to think about the foundations being destroyed the
lawlessness the wickedness and and he says to slay the priest of the Lord why
because their hand also was with David,
and because they knew when he fled
and did not show it to me.
But the servants of the king thanked the Lord
for their righteousness and their just character.
They would not put forth their hand
to fall upon the priest of the Lord.
But in verse 18, the king said to Doag,
turn thou and fall upon the priest.
And Doag the Edomite turned,
and he fell upon the priest and slew on that day
fourscore and five persons that wear a linen ephod.
85 priests were killed.
And I just want you to think for a moment
and you begin to understand a little bit
about what David is facing and what he's dealing with.
And this was a tragic situation for David.
When he heard about this, his heart was so heavy
and so grieved because these 85 men lost their lives
and he felt some level of responsibility,
but he's aware of the fact that,
yes, all these attacks are upon me,
but the foundations are literally being destroyed.
They're eroding away the law that God has set forth,
the parameters by which we're to operate as a nation.
And you think about these priests
and again, they did nothing wrong.
They were guilty of nothing.
And yet Doag, because of various reasons
that you could look through the scriptures in that passage,
you can try to figure out the motives behind Doag
and what he was doing and how he was trying
to get position and rank and what have you.
And you find that these 85 men lose their lives.
So now it's not just that David himself
is the one that's being attacked,
that David himself is the one that's being pursued.
But now you got all these other things
that are taking place.
I mean, we looked last week at Ziklag
and how the fact of the matter is that it was David
that went there to deliver the people from the Philistines.
Why? Because Saul wasn't fulfilling his duties.
Saul was just too busy seeking David.
At times, as we go back to Psalm 11,
and we look at verse number three,
if the foundations be destroyed,
what can the righteous do?
At times, the circumstances in our society
can have an adverse effect on us.
We, during times of great difficulty,
when it seems as if the foundations are being destroyed,
we may be led to conclude that there's no hope.
We may be led to think something like this,
there's nothing we can do.
We must resist the tendency to focus on the circumstances
and to be adversely impacted by them.
We need to stop living under the circumstances
and being discouraged by all that is going on
in our society.
What we must do is not ask the question
that ends verse number three,
but follow what takes place in verse number four.
We must shift our focus upward
as we see David doing in verse number four.
The reality is that when we begin to look
at this verse of Scripture
and begin to think about a society that's falling apart,
we can get into the position of what's it worth anyway?
What can we really do?
Can we really make a difference?
But you know what that's doing?
That's keeping God out of the equation.
That's just looking upon what you
or what I would might be able to accomplish.
But we find that the circumstances
that are revealed in verse number three
turns for us to verse number four.
And if you're taking notes,
I have just simply said number two, our confidence.
We see the circumstances,
but I want you to note the confidence of David
in verse number four.
And this is what's so vital for us
and so important for us to understand.
See, verse number three
would really be a human perspective.
It would be living on the temporal plane.
There's nothing that can be accomplished.
I mean, look at all that's going on,
but verse number four is a godly perspective
that's now looking at the eternal plane.
Notice in verse number four,
the Lord is in his holy temple.
The Lord's throne is in heaven.
His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men.
Three quick thoughts from verse number four
as we begin to think about shifting our focus upwards
during those times of circumstances
in which it seems to be overwhelming and discouraging
that our confidence is in the fact that,
number one, our God is on his throne.
Our God is on his throne.
When Saul was not fulfilling his duties as king of Israel,
as David is being pursued,
as he evaluates the circumstances in the society
that he knows and he loves in his homeland,
and he sees the very foundations eroding
and being destroyed, the lawlessness and the wickedness,
what David had to remember is that God is on his throne.
For you and for me this evening,
it's absolutely imperative that we're mindful of the fact
that we're regularly reminding ourselves of the truth
that our God is on his throne.
The Bible declares very plainly in the book of Revelation,
the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.
He's never going to be defeated.
He's never going to resign.
He's on his throne and he rules and he reigns.
And for that we ought to rejoice
and it should give us confidence.
Not only do we see from verse number four
that our God is on his throne,
but we find also in this verse of scripture
that our God has all power.
I'm thankful this evening,
that though we are limitless, limited, excuse me,
though we are limited and though we lack the power
that we could accomplish certain things,
we serve a God who has all power.
We serve a God who is able to do exceeding abundantly
above all that we ask or think.
And we begin to understand
that when David shifts his focus here,
the Lord is in his holy temple,
the Lord's throne is in heaven,
that David begins to have this perspective
and understanding that our God is on the throne
and our God has all power.
And though David was being pursued
and though these wicked things were taking place,
he had to get his focus on God.
And it's so important for us tonight
that our focus be on the Lord
because we can get distracted
by so many things that are going on.
We can get distracted by all of the wickedness
and the lawlessness and the erosion
of what we would think has been a society
that was built on Judeo-Christian values,
et cetera, et cetera.
And the reality is that we understand
that evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse.
I mean, God told us that,
but yet we must not be discouraged.
We must not be distracted.
We must get our focus upon the fact
that we serve the God who is on his throne
and who has all power.
I notice in verse number four,
the Bible says,
his eyes behold,
his eyelids try the children of men.
Not only is he on his throne
and not only does he have all power,
but we find that our God knows all things.
He knows all things.
He knows about it.
And that ought to cause us to rest.
It ought to cause us to rejoice
because we find that David says,
and the Lord put I my trust.
Now, again, as we mentioned in Psalm nine
in verse number 10,
the Bible says,
and they that know thy name
will put their trust in thee.
For thou Lord has not forsaken them that seek thee.
And David knew who God was.
He knew, verse number four,
that the Lord is in his holy temple,
that the Lord's throne is in heaven.
He was aware of that.
And he declares in verse number one
that I've put my trust in the Lord.
And we find that he, David,
is recognizing that though he does not have all power,
though he does not know all things,
that he serves the God who does.
And this evening,
we begin to think about these verses of scripture
and we see where the Bible says
that his eyes behold in his eyelids,
try the children of men.
We find that God was working on the behalf of David
as we illustrated last week,
looking at those examples in the book of 1 Samuel
where God was defending and God was working.
Why?
Because God sees and God knows.
There are times in which we go through life
and we might have this perspective
no one really understands.
But we fail to recognize that our God
has a deep, intimate understanding
of everything that we face
and everything that we're dealing with.
And our God will give us the strength
and the grace that we need.
And so really when we begin to look at this question
that is asked at the end of verse number three,
when we look at it from a human perspective,
what can the righteous do?
We can come to that place of saying nothing.
I mean, it's just useless, it's hopeless.
I mean, there's nothing that's gonna change this.
It's going so quickly in the wrong direction
and it's just pointless.
And from a human perspective,
we'll just kind of get out of the game, so to speak.
Get on the sidelines, throw up our hands
and say, what's the use?
But when we have a proper perspective,
when we see God in His rightful place,
when we understand that He's on His throne,
that He has all power, that He knows all things
and He sees all things,
then we understand that what the righteous can do
is everything that God has commanded us to do.
That we continue to go forth,
we continue to do what God has called us to do,
what He's commissioned us to do.
Why?
Because God will work and God will bless.
And God sees and God works.
And it's not based on my power or on your power, it's based on His power.
He said this, but you shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost has come upon you.
That means that I don't have the power, it's the Holy Spirit of God who empowers me.
Amen?
My words are not powerful and neither are yours.
But God's words are powerful, are they not?
It's quick and sharp, it's powerful, it's a living book.
We find that as we go forth in the path in which God has laid before us to do the work
that He has called us to do, we do not get our eyes on the fact that the foundations
are eroding and look at the societal collapse.
No, we keep our eyes on Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, and we understand
that He is in control and He rules and He reigns and we just continue doing what He's
called us to do.
And then we leave all the results for God.
It's a wonderful thing to be able to leave it in the hands of God, that God can accomplish
and God can do what we cannot do, what we're incapable of doing.
Have you ever tried to use a witty argument with someone to try to convince them of some
Bible truth?
I mean, you try to come up with the best illustrations and analogies and all this sort of thing and
you know what you find out?
Your words are not powerful.
It's God's words that are powerful.
We just give the truth.
We just continue to trust God.
The reality is that there are times in which as David is, and again as you study the book
of Psalms, as you study and read through the Psalms, you find so often the transparency
of the Psalmist, that David is pouring his heart out before the Lord.
He's not the author of all the Psalms obviously, but in the ones that are the Davidic Psalms,
we find that there's such transparency.
And for us this evening, it helps us.
Why?
Because there are times that we face circumstances that we feel the same way.
What's the point?
No one wants to hear.
No one cares.
Those thoughts will go in your head, and it will discourage you, and it will defeat
you.
But no, we get our eyes on Jesus and say, He's on His throne.
He's got all power.
He knows all things.
And by the way, He didn't tell me to go and to give the truth and to preach the gospel.
He didn't tell me to do all of that so that I could have results.
He told me to do it as a matter of obedience, as a matter of obedience.
And as I obey Him, guess what He does?
He blesses obedience.
That principle is found throughout the Scriptures.
And so we begin to look at this passage and begin to find in the life of David that there's
so many relevant aspects to what he was dealing with and what he was facing.
And yet he was not going to be shaken by it.
Why?
Because of the first statement in the Psalm, in the Lord put I my trust.
And it's so vital for us this evening to have had that declared position that I've put my
trust in the Lord.
But look at all these things that are going on.
Yeah, but I'm trusting God.
I'm not trusting the government.
I'm not trusting the, you fill in the blank, whatever it is that could be trusted.
They will fail you, but God never will fail us.
And it's a simple shift of perspective from the foundations being destroyed to the Lord
being in His holy temple and the Lord's throne is in heaven and how we need to get our eyes
on Jesus.
Remember what the Psalmist said in Psalm 121, and I'll finish with this, I will lift up
mine eyes unto the hills from whence cometh my help.
That's an action, is it not?
It's an action.
I will lift up mine eyes.
Something that we have to do, something that we have to purpose to do.
Why?
Because you know what your tendency is and my tendency is?
It's to look at all of the temporal things because it's what's right in front of us.
It's what we're seeing.
It's what we're experiencing.
It's what we're dealing with every day.
And the Psalmist says, I will lift up mine eyes into the hills from whence cometh my
help.
My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.
And what a joy to know that our God is the creator and He is our helper.
Let's pray together.
Father, we love you.
Thank you for accepting us.
Thank you for the opportunity that you've given us to gather.
And Lord, we're excited about the opportunity to just serve you in these days and to see
what you could accomplish through us.
I pray, God, that you would help us to be yielded and surrendered.
Help us, Lord, to keep our eyes on Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.
We thank you for the prayer time that we can have on Wednesday evenings.
And I pray, God, that you would bless and work through the corporate prayer time, Lord,
that we know, we believe tonight that you hear and you answer prayer.
And we're so grateful for that biblical truth.
And I pray that you would just have your will and way throughout the remainder of the service
tonight.
For it's in Christ's name we pray.
Amen.